# (34) Vision Voice - Empowering the Visually Impaired using AI

Welcome to the **VisionVoice** documentation.

If you have any issues with installation, please contact the group via email at your latest convenience so we can get it sorted!

**Caution** | Please try not to share this code around! I have hardcoded my API key into this project. 
  ***Please keep this repostitory in safe hands***!

## How it works
VisionVoice is a web application which enables vision impaired users to capture or upload an image and receive a spoken description generated by an AI model. 

Here's a bit about how it functions:
#### Frontend (Browser)
1. Users can open their webcam or upload an image.
2. The website uses the < video > element for webcam previews and the < canvas > tag to capture their webcam.
The front end is packed with features such as high contrast mode, ARIA labels for screen readers and large buttons for easier interaction. 

#### Image Processing
Once an image is captured or uploaded, it is converted into a Base64-encoded JPEG using the <canvas> element.
This encoded image is sent from the browser to the backend server via a POST request.

#### Backend Server (Node.js)
The backend is built with Express.js and exposes the endpoint /api/describe.
It then receives the Base64 image and formats a request for the Google Gemini 2.5-flash model that we're using. Gemini generates a concise description of the image, which is optimised for users with visual impairments. 

#### AI Response & Speech
The backend returns the generated description to the frontend.

The frontend displays the description in a text box. It then automatically reads it aloud using the Web Speech API (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Speech_API).

Users can play or stop the speech with the dedicated play or stop buttons.

#### Accessibility & interaction
High Contrast Mode changes the UI to maximise readability.

All buttons are large and clearly labelled, and supports native keyboard navigation on browsers.

The app ensures the description is simple, short and avoids complex formatting for the user..



## Documentation for Windows Systems

Firstly, you'll need to download the files by clicking the green code button, then clicking 'Download ZIP'. Extract all the files onto a new folder named 'VisionVoice' anywhere on your computer, although on your desktop is preferred. 

While it's extracting, you'll need to download the latest version of Node.js if you don't have it already: https://nodejs.org/en/download. If you're unsure, open Command Prompt/PowerShell and run `node -v`. It should output the version that you're running. If not, install it. 

Then, run Windows Powershell as administrator and cd into the directory that the folder is in. For me, it'll be this:
`cd C:\Users\Pat\Desktop\VisionVoice`. 

After you're in the directory, run `npm install express axios cors`. This installs the packages that the project needs for the backend. 

If you get any errors, it's probably because of the security settings on your machine. You can run `Set-ExecutionPolicy -Scope CurrentUser -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned` in PowerShell to disable this, then run the axios cors command again in PowerShell.

After that, you can close out of all PowerShell/cmd prompt windows and open up 2 fresh instances of PowerShell in Administrator again. 


In one administrator priviledge PowerShell, CD into the same directory as before and run `node server.js`, which will start the javascript backend. Leave it in the background for now.

In another PowerShell running in Administrator, CD into the directory as before, then run `npx serve .`. It'll ask you to install the following packages, click 'y' then enter. After this, it will serve that directory as a server and give you a Local IP address. The 3000 port is already in use because of the javascript backend, so it'll give you a random one. Copy this IP into a browser, preferably Google Chrome and it should work.

To safely close out of the website, click `CTRL+C` on both PowerShell instances and it'll shut down :)

## Running it after installation
To run it again after installation, run PowerShell as Administrator, CD into the path where VisionVoice is located, then host the node.js server using `node server.js`. 
Then open another PowerShell, CD into the directory, then run `npx serve .`. This will give you the IP needed to access the website. Ensure you run the node.js server first, then serve the directory. 

## Documentation for MacOS/Linux Systems
No documentation for MacOS/Linx systems will be provided, although the steps above are pretty similar to what you need to do. 

